Fraud detection
Machine learning and deep learning algorithms can analyze transaction patterns and flag anomalies, such as unusual spending or login locations, that indicate fraudulent transactions. This enables organizations to respond more quickly to potential fraud and limit its impact, giving themselves and customers greater peace of mind.
Personalized marketing
Retailers, banks and other customer-facing companies can use AI to create personalized customer experiences and marketing campaigns that delight customers, improve sales and prevent churn. Based on data from customer purchase history and behaviors, deep learning algorithms can recommend products and services customers are likely to want, and even generate personalized copy and special offers for individual customers in real time.
Human resources and recruitment
AI-driven recruitment platforms can streamline hiring by screening resumes, matching candidates with job descriptions, and even conducting preliminary interviews using video analysis. These and other tools can dramatically reduce the mountain of administrative paperwork associated with fielding a large volume of candidates. It can also reduce response times and time-to-hire, improving the experience for candidates whether they get the job or not.
Application development and modernization
Generative AI code generation tools and automation tools can streamline repetitive coding tasks associated with application development, and accelerate the migration and modernization (reformatting and replatorming) of legacy applications at scale. These tools can speed up tasks, help ensure code consistency and reduce errors.
Predictive maintenance
Machine learning models can analyze data from sensors, Internet of Things (IoT) devices and operational technology (OT) to forecast when maintenance will be required and predict equipment failures before they occur. AI-powered preventive maintenance helps prevent downtime and enables you to stay ahead of supply chain issues before they affect the bottom line.
AI challenges and risks 
Organizations are scrambling to take advantage of the latest AI technologies and capitalize on AI's many benefits. This rapid adoption is necessary, but adopting and maintaining AI workflows comes with challenges and risks.
Data risks
AI systems rely on data sets that might be vulnerable to data poisoning, data tampering, data bias or cyberattacks that can lead to data breaches. Organizations can mitigate these risks by protecting data integrity and implementing security and availability throughout the entire AI ifecycle, from development to training and deployment and postdeployment.
Model risks
Threat actors can target AI models for theft, reverse engineering or unauthorized manipulation. Attackers might compromise a model’s integrity by tampering with its architecture, weights or parameters; the core components that determine a model’s behavior, accuracy and performance.
Operational risks
Like all technologies, models are susceptible to operational risks such as model drift, bias and breakdowns in the governance structure. Left unaddressed, these risks can lead to system failures and cybersecurity vulnerabilities that threat actors can use.
Ethics and legal risks
If organizations don’t prioritize safety and ethics when developing and deploying AI systems, they risk committing privacy violations and producing biased outcomes. For example, biased training data used for hiring decisions might reinforce gender or racial stereotypes and create AI models that favor certain demographic groups over others.
AI ethics and governance 
AI ethics is a multidisciplinary field that studies how to optimize AI's beneficial impact while reducing risks and adverse outcomes. Principles of AI ethics are applied through a system of AI governance consisted of guardrails that help ensure that AI tools and systems remain safe and ethical.
AI governance encompasses oversight mechanisms that address risks. An ethical approach to AI governance requires the involvement of a wide range of stakeholders, including developers, users, policymakers and ethicists, helping to ensure that AI-related systems are developed and used to align with society's values.
Here are common values associated with AI ethics and responsible AI:
Explainability and interpretability
As AI becomes more advanced, humans are challenged to comprehend and retrace how the algorithm came to a result. Explainable AI is a set of processes and methods that enables human users to interpret, comprehend and trust the results and output created by algorithms.
Fairness and inclusion
Although machine learning, by its very nature, is a form of statistical discrimination, the discrimination becomes objectionable when it places privileged groups at systematic advantage and certain unprivileged groups at systematic disadvantage, potentially causing varied harms. To encourage fairness, practitioners can try to minimize algorithmic bias across data collection and model design, and to build more diverse and inclusive teams.

Robustness and security
Robust AI effectively handles exceptional conditions, such as abnormalities in input or malicious attacks, without causing unintentional harm. It is also built to withstand intentional and unintentional interference by protecting against exposed vulnerabilities.

Accountability and transparency
Organizations should implement clear responsibilities and governance structures for the development, deployment and outcomes of AI systems. In addition, users should be able to see how an AI service works, evaluate its functionality, and comprehend its strengths and limitations. Increased transparency provides information for AI consumers to better understand how the AI model or service was created.

Privacy and compliance
Many regulatory frameworks, including GDPR, mandate that organizations abide by certain privacy principles when processing personal information. It is crucial to be able to protect AI models that might contain personal information, control what data goes into the model in the first place, and to build adaptable systems that can adjust to changes in regulation and attitudes around AI ethics.

Weak AI vs. Strong AI 
In order to contextualize the use of AI at various levels of complexity and sophistication, researchers have defined several types of AI that refer to its level of sophistication:

Weak AI: Also known as “narrow AI,” defines AI systems designed to perform a specific task or a set of tasks. Examples might include “smart” voice assistant apps, such as Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri, a social media chatbot or the autonomous vehicles promised by Tesla.

Strong AI: Also known as “artificial general intelligence” (AGI) or “general AI,” possess the ability to understand, learn and apply knowledge across a wide range of tasks at a level equal to or surpassing human intelligence. This level of AI is currently theoretical and no known AI systems approach this level of sophistication. Researchers argue that if AGI is even possible, it requires major increases in computing power. Despite recent advances in AI development, self-aware AI systems of science fiction remain firmly in that realm.

History of AI 
The idea of "a machine that thinks" dates back to ancient Greece. But since the advent of electronic computing (and relative to some of the topics discussed in this article) important events and milestones in the evolution of AI include the following:

1950
Alan Turing publishes Computing Machinery and Intelligence (link resides outside ibm.com). In this paper, Turing—famous for breaking the German ENIGMA code during WWII and often referred to as the "father of computer science"—asks the following question: "Can machines think?"

From there, he offers a test, now famously known as the "Turing Test," where a human interrogator would try to distinguish between a computer and human text response. While this test has undergone much scrutiny since it was published, it remains an important part of the history of AI, and an ongoing concept within philosophy as it uses ideas around linguistics.

1956
John McCarthy coins the term "artificial intelligence" at the first-ever AI conference at Dartmouth College. (McCarthy went on to invent the Lisp language.) Later that year, Allen Newell, J.C. Shaw and Herbert Simon create the Logic Theorist, the first-ever running AI computer program.

1967
Frank Rosenblatt builds the Mark 1 Perceptron, the first computer based on a neural network that "learned" through trial and error. Just a year later, Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert publish a book titled Perceptrons, which becomes both the landmark work on neural networks and, at least for a while, an argument against future neural network research initiatives.

1980
Neural networks, which use a backpropagation algorithm to train itself, became widely used in AI applications.

1995
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig publish Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (link resides outside ibm.com), which becomes one of the leading textbooks in the study of AI. In it, they delve into four potential goals or definitions of AI, which differentiates computer systems based on rationality and thinking versus acting.

1997
IBM's Deep Blue beats then world chess champion Garry Kasparov, in a chess match (and rematch).

2004
John McCarthy writes a paper, What Is Artificial Intelligence? (link resides outside ibm.com), and proposes an often-cited definition of AI. By this time, the era of big data and cloud computing is underway, enabling organizations to manage ever-larger data estates, which will one day be used to train AI models. 

2011
IBM Watson® beats champions Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter at Jeopardy! Also, around this time, data science begins to emerge as a popular discipline.

2015
Baidu's Minwa supercomputer uses a special deep neural network called a convolutional neural network to identify and categorize images with a higher rate of accuracy than the average human.

2016
DeepMind's AlphaGo program, powered by a deep neural network, beats Lee Sodol, the world champion Go player, in a five-game match. The victory is significant given the huge number of possible moves as the game progresses (over 14.5 trillion after just four moves). Later, Google purchased DeepMind for a reported USD 400 million.

2022
A rise in large language models or LLMs, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT, creates an enormous change in performance of AI and its potential to drive enterprise value. With these new generative AI practices, deep-learning models can be pretrained on large amounts of data.

2024
The latest AI trends point to a continuing AI renaissance. Multimodal models that can take multiple types of data as input are providing richer, more robust experiences. These models bring together computer vision image recognition and NLP speech recognition capabilities. Smaller models are also making strides in an age of diminishing returns with massive models with large parameter counts.